In this exercise we're going to
demonstrate how to
use the for-loop to compute the factorial
of a number.
So let me start my program and then I'll
demonstrate arithmetically what factorial
is before we write the program.
So we're gonna call this chap8ex1.py.
Five factorial is equal to 5 times 4,
times 3, times 2, times 1.
And then 6 factorial, would be equal to 6
times 5 factorial.
So if you only think about recursion,
which we're gonna talk about later in the
course, you can see that it's very
easy to provide a recursive definition for
factorial.
But we're not gonna do that here.
We are going to demonstrate how to do it
iteratively using a for-loop.
So lets start the program.
So the first thing we're gonna do is
prompt the user to enter
a number, then we get the number for the
user and here I've used
a, another input function, just point on
input, which works just like raw
input, and you can use it instead of raw
input when you need to.
It'll certainly work for this example.
And then we have a variable fact, which
we'll set to one.
Fact is going to store our successive
products, and so we have to use 1 instead
of 0 because if we use 0, each successive
product would then be equal to 0.
Which is not what we want, because we want
to
start out with 1, and 1 times 2, then 2
times
3, then 6 times 4, and 24 times 5, to get
the answer of 120, which I probably should
put up here.
So after we've established our fact
variable, we're ready to write the loop.
So we're gonna use range, and we're going
to say the range is going to be from 1
to num plus 1, we have to do that to get
it through 5, to do 1 through 5.
Even if we enter 5 as the input, you'll
see in a moment.
And here I already see a typo let me fix
that real quick, that should be i.
Then the body of the loop simply says fact
is equal to fact times i.
Then last we're going to display the
result, so we'll say
the number that we entered factorial is
equal to, like so.
So let's save the program, go back to our
command line prompt, and we type
chap8ex1.py, we'll say five and five
factorial is 120.
Lets run it again, lets do 10 and see how
quickly the numbers grow
when you're computing factorial and we
could
do several other numbers, but we'll stop
there.
The for-loop provides us with a easy way
to do what's called the factorial
computation iteratively.
And like I said, there's also a recursive
solution to factorial, and
we'll look at that when we study recursion
later on in the course.
But with that, we're finished with this
first exercise and we're
ready to move to the second and last
exercise in this chapter.